Nintendo

Prologue
Ash stuck to the hood of the car like too-thick makeup, burning holes through the paint and primer. The dust clogged the air filter and put the whole journey in jeopardy. Under orange-grey skies, Mino and Yoko had to turn the car around somewhere northwest of Seatle and find another way to New York City. It was June 18, 1980. Mount Saint Helens had just erupted destroying thousands of acres of virgin forest and killing fifty-eight. An omen for the couple who had been tasked by their father extend his reach into America, to build Nintendo of America. (Sheff 94)



***********



Level 1
The Family Business

Minoru Arakawa had made the trip across America once before, in 1971. It was the summer before his first year of graduate school at MIT studying Civil Engineering Program. Minoru had traveled to America to see if he could make it on his own. The Arakawas were an aristocratic family in Kyoto with an old fortune in textiles. His mother's family had been part of Japanese politics since at least the eight century – they were descended from Emperor Uda. When his parents had married the combined families owned almost a fifth of Kyoto real estate (Sheff 81). Mino had want for nothing, yet his parents had no plans for him. His older brother would take over the family business while his younger sister would marry wealthy. The only advice he remembers getting from his father was "Be unselfish, do something for others" (Sheff 82). He told Nintendo historian Daniel Sheff, "It is difficult when you do not have to work. You have to think. It sounds easy, but sometimes it is not. I struggled to know why we are here and how we should best spend our lives." So he went to America for craduate school and travelled back and forth across the country. Fifteen thousand miles later he settled in Boston and finished his degree. Then Arakawa found a position at Merubeni, a Japanese real estate development company with offices all over the world.

On a trip back home to Kyoto, Minoru attended a high society ball of Kyoto's upper crust, a Japanese version of "Russian Ark." The old money, traditional Arakawas mingled with the new money, western-influenced business elite. Minoru spent the night dancing and chatting with Yoko Yamauchi, a young rebelious girl who enjoyed the opportunity to dance with the good-humored, handsome, and well travelled Minoru. Yoko was also glad to be out of her father's attention. He would never had allowed her to go to such a party with so many traditional Japanese aristocrats. (Sheff)

Yoko's father, Hiroshi Yamauchi, had inherited a profitable hanafuda card company. Hiroshi Yamauchi was the first Yamauchi in three generations to inherit the company. For sixty years the company passed from father to son-in-law. The Yamachi's hadn't produced a male heir in that time, but the sons-in-law had taken the family name as a condition of inheriting the company. When Hiroshi's grandfather become ill in 1949 and turned to Hiroshi to take his place as president. Hiroshi's father, heir apparent, had run off in disgrace when his son was born in 1927 and was thus removed from the line of succession. Hiroshi made one condition, that all other family members be removed from the company. Before he passed away, Hiroshi's grandfather accepted the offer and fired Hiroshi's cousin. When Hiroshi took over he fired every manager who had worked with his grandfather. At age twenty-one Hiroshi had consolidated the family business under himself assuming the presidency of Nintendo and cleaned house (Sheff 19). "As far as Hiroshi was concerned, to [his grandfather] he remained an ill-mannered, disrespectful, and spoiled child. Hiroshi lived with the knowledge that he had betrayed and disappointed the two most important men in his life, his father and grandfather." (Sheff 19).

Over the coming decades, Hiroshi built Nintendo from a card game maker into one of Japan's largest toy manufacturers. He expanded his business into electro-mechanical amusments: love testers and shooting galleries, toys one would have found in midways and shopping malls in 1972.

Yoko grew up in Hiroshi's conservative and tightly controlled household. Hiroshi ruled his family like he ruled his company, strictly controlling every aspect of its operation. Daniel Sheff writes: "Yamauchi was especially tough on his daughters. Young women, he felt, could not be trusted. He saw what they did when they were out on their own late at night; many of the girls he met were Yoko's age. Likewise, his promiscuity, his temper, and his absences made Yoko wary of men. She decided that if she ever settled down, it would be with a man who had nothing in common with her father." (Sheff 84). He was concerned only with the business of Nintendo and his children resented him for it. Years later Yoko would say, "He's not a typical daddy you play with. I got to know him after I got married. I like him as a person, but I don't think he's not the type of man I would marry." (BBC) She probably only got to know him because her future husband, Minoru, would become Hiroshi's hand in the American division of the family business.

Hiroshi did not immediately trust Minoru in spite of his education, respectable career, and cosmopolitan experience. Minoru was a man of inherited wealth (Sheff 85). his traditional, old money family was at odds with Yamauchi's western, self made family over an arranged marriage between the two families that had fallen apart years ago. After weeks of lobbying Yamauchi gave his approval for Yoko and Mioru's marriage. Privately Yamauchi told his wife "he had actually been impressed by the Arakawa family all along... 'Arakawa is such a fine man that no son of his could be bad.'" (Sheff 87)

Yoko and Minoru married and moved to Vancouver where Minoru was working on several profitable real estate ventures for Merubeni. Merubeni had tried to prevent Minoru from bringing his wife along, but she refused to let him go alone. In Canada Yoko was out of her father's grasp, but quite unhappy. She spent her days home alone learning English from the television. Minoru spent most of his time working between Vancouver, New York City, and Japan (Sheff 90). The marriage was strained. Finances were tight too, but Yoko refused her family's offers for assistance; she never used the credit card they had given her before moving to America.

Hiroshi offered his son-in-law a chance to move back east with a job at Nintendo's manufacturing operations in Malaysia. Sheff reports: "Yoko was mortified. She wanted nothing to do with Nintendo. Her father was married to the business. He brought home all his anger and frustration when things were going badly. Yamauchi himself blamed Nintendo for his chronic stomachaches. Throughout her childhood, the family had waited at home for him in the evenings, fearful of his moods. 'We were all shaken by him,' she remembers. 'We all suffered.' Although Mino worked just as hard as Yamauchi, Yoko wasn't under anyone's thumb. There was no way she would allow Mino to accept a job with Nintendo; her father would then be back in control of her life." He refused the offer.

Some time passed. Nintendo was having great success in Japan selling pong consoles, arcade cabinets, and portable Game & Watch systems. Taito's Space Invaders was a hit in America showed Yamauchi that there was money to be made by Japanese games in American Arcades. Hiroshi needed an agent in America to help import and sell Nintendo products.

Yamauchi sat down with Minoru in Kyoto in 1980 to talk business over scotch. For two hours Yamauchi laid out his plans for Nintendo of America and how Minoru was going to help him. When he sensed Arakawa's interest fading he would pour more scotch.

Yamauchi was a tough negotiater. Designer Henk Rogers recalled negotiating with Yamauchi over a game of Go: "He is absolutely serious like he's trying to win a championship game every time. When you play aginst him, you're drawn into that same atmosphere. You better give him a good game or you're wasting his time. He's the toughest businessman I know. When he makes a decision, it's 'yes' or 'no' and he doesn't change his mind." (BBC) "[His game] is very forceful when it needs to be, yet there is give and take. But when He becomes strong, he does not look back. He takes advantage of weakness. He knows far in advance what will happen and he never loses his composure." (Sheff 80). Hiroshi had likely already concluded Minoru would lead NOA, it was just a matter of convincing him to reach the same conclusion.

Yoko wanted nothing to do with it. She didn't want to be pulled back into her father's circle (Sheff 94). She would be caught between her husband and her father. But Minoru was intrigued. This was, perhaps, his chance to start something new. To build something himself, not just work as a travelling real estate salaryman. To answer the unanswered questions he had when he travelled across America eight years before. Daniel Sheff writes: "Yoko and I were both from rich families," he says. "We could have lived our lives without working, so money wasn't a motivation. When it isn't, something else must compel you." He tried to reassure Yoko, but she did not relent. "No matter how much you accomplish, it will be viewed as mediocre, because you will be thought of as the son-in-law," she said." (Sheff 94)

Eventually she relented. Perhaps it was the opportunity to have her husband settle down. They packed the car with their minimal belongings and made the trip across the country from Vancouver to New York City with a detour around a volcano.

***********

Level 2
If You Can Make It Here

The landlord's name was Mario. He frequently bothered Arakawa for rent for Nintendo of America's Hackensack warehouse. "There were enormous rats, a loading elevator that worked once in a while, and loading-dock doors that always got jammed. There was no heating or air conditioning. In winter the place was damp and frigid, in summer a muggy, relentless oven." (Sheff 96). Working in the hot box warehouse were kids Arakawa recruited from arcades. Al Stone and Ron Judy, Atari's salemen came and went with invoices for sales of imported Ninetendo cabinets to midways, arcades, bars, hotel lobbies, chinese restaurants, laundromats, pizza parlors, and anywhere that would buy them. Sone and Judy's lawyer, Howard Lincoln, drew up the contracts.

Yoko Arakawa was Nintendo of America's first employee. She and Minoru, set their minds to learning everything about the game business by watching gamers. This was something Atari executives had failed to do. Daniel Sheff describes their trips to arcades:

<blockquote>

"They looked over players' shoulders until it made the young kids nervous. "What the fuck's your problem, mister?" one kid in a Kiss T-shirt barked at Minoru. Arakawa asked him, "Would you like a job?" He watched kids stand in front of the machines, transfixed, their hands melded to controllers, their bony arms like umbilical cords joining human and machine. He asked the kids questions about what made a game good. Arakawa realized that the most successful games had something the players couldn't articulate. The words used to describe them were those usually reserved to describe forms of intimacy between people. It was as if the players and the game itself somehow merged. The other phenomena that made successful games were more obvious. They had to have immediate impact and exciting noise and graphics; a player had to be captivated within the first thirty seconds. There could be no letup in the intensity for two minutes, the time that one quarter lasted. If the players weren't engrossed by then, they left the machine for good. If the game snared them, the string of quarters to follow could have bought dinner for a family of four." (Sheff 95)

</blockquote>

Howard Lincoln described Arakawa's dilligence in learning the business: "You know that the amazing thing is Mister Arakawa first came to this country he had no idea of video games US market or any of that. He had to learn all of it from scratch. He was the kind of guy when he got into something he just continued to work and work and work at it until he had mastered it." (BBC)

The popularity of Pac-Man had ensured that Japanese imports would have priveledged status in arcades, but Nintendo of America struggled. Arakawa, always an optimist, predicted rapid success for NOA in Vending Times in January 1981: "Our product has been well recieved, and incoming orders are at a high level... By the middle of 1981, we hope to have offices and complete distribution/service centers on both East and West Coasts. It's all very exciting to anticipate." (Vending Times January, 1981 p 40).

Nintendo of America announced their first import, Radar Scope, which shipped as a upright, cocktail table, or cockpit cabinet: "Cosmic space adventure offers one or two players the opportunity to control an exciting fight between the space ships and the enemy fleets of UFO's that appear from the ends of the cosmos in a bright, dramatic image on the radar screen... Racing at cosmic speeds, their mission is to destroy the player's spaceship. The player defends his spaceship with rapid fire." (Vending Times) It sounded a lot like Space Invaders. Or Galaga. Or Galaxian. Or Defender.

In 1981 there was no shortage of games like Radar Scope and players were more interested in the Pac-Man-style maze games. Radar Scope didn't sell. Stone and Judy had 3,000 unsold Radar Scope cabinets stuck in the New Jersey warehouse (Kent 156) and were on the verge of quitting. Mario kept asking for the rent. Arakawa turned to his father-in-law in Japan who had been frustrated by the trouble breaking into the American market (Kent 157). What were they going to do about all these unsold cabinets?



***********



Level 3
Kong vs. Kong

Hiroshi Yamauchi was the alpha and omega of Nintendo. His word was final. He handpicked his designers. He handpicked their games. And he was almost always right.

<blockquote>

"Yamauchi has never played a video game in his life and he had little interest in them. Still, he alone was the judge and jury when it came to deciding which games Nintendo would release. It was audacious, and he was either remarkably intuitive or terrifically lucky. Yamauchi was criticized for being ruthless when it came to many of his business practices— manipulating the market, terrorizing employees—but no one questioned his genius when it came to choosing Famicom games. A Nintendo manager criticized Yamauchi for his obstinacy but praised his instinct: "It's like a sense for the fashion business, knowing what will become hot and popular next season. He can read a few years in advance. He is so certain that he is right that he listens to no one." (Sheff 39)

"Nintendo would, Yamauchi decided, become a haven for videogame artists, for it was artists, not technicians, who made great games. "An ordinary man," Yamauchi said, "cannot develop good games no matter how hard he tries. A handful of people in this world can develop games that everybody wants. Those are the people we want at Nintendo." He was interested only in the one genius, as he put it, who would drive Nintendo. He wanted to turn Nintendo into the single place the hottest game designers wanted to be associated with... Yamauchi wanted to create a place where his geniuses would be encouraged and inspired. But how? He was used to badgering and cajoling, or simply demanding—and that was certainly not the same thing as inspiring people, nurturing them. His reputation for aloofness and cockiness had grown with Nintendo. He luxuriated in his position as the merciless Goliath of his industry. He was already infamous for squashing people—or companies—that crossed him. He made up his own rules as he went along and he refused to play politics (which enraged government officials, who were used to being catered to). But could he inspire! "Research and development is the most difficult department to control," he observed. "It is difficult to control artists because they do not want to compromise." (Sheff 38)

</blockquote>

He was everything that Ray Kassar, Steve Ross, and the rest of the Atari/Warner management weren't. Lack of taste, lack of appreciation for good designers and engineers, lack of creativity, lack of innovation were all things that had doomed Atari. Yamauchi was different, even though he never played video games.

Yamauchi had a knack for spotting talent. In 1980 He hired a young artist, Shigero Miyamoto, on a hunch that the young man, with his wild hair and crazy imagination, might one day prove to be valuable. Yamauchi had never had a staff artist at Nintendo, but found work for Miyamoto designing artwork for their arcade games. When Arakawa called a year later looking for a solution to the Radar Scope failure in America Yamauchi gave Miyamoto the assignment to convert Radar Scope into something that would sell. Miyamoto had never designed a video game, but he was about to create a classic.

Miyamoto dreamed up a beauty and the beast variation: a story about a carpenter, his paramour, and his a pet gorilla. One day the gorilla escapes his cage and kidnaps the carpenter's girlfriend, not as an act of malice against her, just to teach the carpenter a lesson about keeping him locked up. It was a zany and colorful idea, and some suggest it was the first arcade video game with a story.

<blockquote>

"Miyamoto wanted the main character to be goofy and awkward. He chose an ordinary carpenter, neither handsome nor heroic. He wanted him to be Walter Mittyesque, someone anyone could relate to. On a large sketch pad he drew a nose. "Having a nose or not having a nose is completely different," he says. "Noses say a great deal." The nose Miyamoto created was a distinctive bulbous orb made even more noticeable because of the exaggerated bushy mustache beneath it. From one of his old notebooks filled with characters, he chose a pair of large, pathetic eyes." (Sheff 48)

</blockquote>

Miyamoto pulled the name of the game from a Japanese-English dictionary: "Donkey" meant "stubborn" and "Kong" meant "gorilla." Cute that the dictionary had named all gorillas after King Kong. Yamauchi sent his plans to save NOA with "Donkey Kong" Arakawa. Howard Lincoln remembers first meeting Miyamoto "He was a young guy, really young. I remember that he came into Yamauchi's office where there's a big and very formal conference room... The door opened and there was a disheveled-I wouldn't call it disheveled-but he was a little bit disheveled and his hair went in ten different directions. And it was this guy, Miyamoto. At that time, I don't think I really knew what it was that he had accomplished in creating Donkey Kong." (Kent 216) Minoru Arakawa enthusiastically presented "Donkey Kong" to Ron Judy and Al Stone, who were unenthusiastic and on the verge of financial ruin (Kent 159).

<blockquote>

"Poor Ron." Howard Lincoln recalls. "I can still see him sitting there when Mr. Arakawa said, "We have this new game and we need to get it trademarked. The name of the game is Donkey Kong."
And I said, "Pardon me. what was that? Donkey Kong? How do you spell that?"
I remember Ron saying, "Yeah. Can you believe that? Donkey Kong!" It was at a point in time when Ron was thinking, "What have I gotten myself into? None of these games have been great. I didn't earn any money, and now the final blow is a game called Donkey Kong, which even my lawyer can't understand." (Kent 159).

</blockquote>

They stuck with him, anyways. Arakawa had a way of creating loyalty with his endless optimism and perseverence. A year later Ron Stone and Al Judy would be millionaires. The game was a hit. It was so popular its hero, the "jumpman," needed a name. Arakawa suggested "Mario" after his landlord, who was finally getting timely payments. Nintendo was on top of the American video game bubble. Yamauchi must have been relieved that his son-in-law pulled through.

When Nintendo decided to license the game for a home console, Atari would have been the natural choice in 1981. But Nintendo approached Coleco, a company that had success in the handheld game market and was gearing up to start producing games for Atari and Mattel as well as launch their own system, Colecovision. Coleco was the underdag and Yamauchi might have wanted to give the license to the company that was the "hungriest" (Sheff 112). But according to Al Kahn of Coleco, "There were basically two strategies at work. We would take these licenses and use them not only in the major systems, but also put them into the handheld category. That was very appealing to Nintendo at the time. That's why we got Donkey Kong from Nintendo, because they saw that we could maximize their potential revenue stream by putting this product across a number of formats that existed at that point in time." (Kent 205). Coleco would use Donkey Kong as the pack-in for ColecoVision to drive sales of the system and then, later, release versions for the Atari 2600 and Intellevision.

Arakawa had Stone's and Judy's lawyer, Howard Lincoln, draw up a contract. Arakawa asked Lincoln to clear Nintendo of any liability for Coleco's port. It was not standard practice, but Arakawa believed "Never give anything away that you don't have to." Lincoln thought, "What the hell, might as well be bold." (Sheff 112). When Coleco hesitated on signing the contract with the unconventional liability clause, Yamauchi himself told them, "Sign the damn thing. You guys are getting ready to ship the product. If you want a license, sign now." (Kent 209). Coleco had to sign or else they didn't have a launch title. Who could argue with Yamauchi?

By May 1983 Coleco sold a million ColecoVisions which damaged Atari's 5200 efforts.

<blockquote>

"When I found out that we did not take the consumer license to Donkey Kong, and that Coleco got it, I asked how could that happen," said Manny Gerrard. "They said, 'Well, it was two dollars a cartridge, and you don't understand. It would have fucked up our cost structure.' I remember I looked at them and I said, 'Guys, you got an 88 percent gross margin on cartridges. Don't you understand that a year from now you will walk on shards of broken glass to get a two-dollar cartridge deal?' Now that decision basically put Coleco in the business because without Donkey Kong, they couldn't have gotten anywhere." (Kent 205).

</blockquote>

Atari missed their shot at the Donkey Kong license, a mistake they wouldn't repeat. Gerrard attempted to rectify the situation by securing the home computer license for Donkey Kong. In the future, Atari and Coleco engaged in bidding wars over licenses. Coleco who often had no intention of actually licensing the games often drove up prices just to punish Atari.

In April 1982 Yamauchi recieved a telex from Sidney Sheinberg President and COO of MCA/Universal. He called his son-in-law waking him up in the middle of the night. The telex demanded that Nintendo turn over all profits from the game in 48 hours and destroy all unsold copies of the game. They said it infringed upon their copyright for King Kong. Coleco got the telex too, and they settled quickly. They didn't want the litigation to slow the release of the ColecoVision.

MCA/Universal wanted to be a player in the video game industry. MCA must have been watching rival Warner Communications make a billion dollars from Atari wondering how they could get in on the action. This lawsuit wasn't just a foot in the door, it was a battering ram. They offered to settle with Coleco for an exchange of stock and a promise of investment in the company. By the time the lawsuits were over, the video game industry was dead, and Coleco never got that investment.

Even tough-skinned Hiroshi Yamauchi was wondering if they should settle. MCA/Universal was a major motion picture studio and communications company with endless funds for litigation. Arakawa insisted that they support Howard Lincoln. Daniel Sheff describes the first meeting between MCA, Coleco, and Nintendo:

<blockquote>

"[Lincoln and Arakawa] pair arrived in L.A. and headed for Universal's main office building, known as the "black tower" (appropriately forbidding, the two felt), in Universal City. Bob Hadl, an MCA attorney, escorted the men into an elaborate office crowded with antiques and expensive artwork. There was a sweeping view of the smog.

Also present were two attorneys from Coleco, MCA's in-house attorney, and an outside counsel. Coleco, which had invested a fortune in its impending launch of the ColecoVision system, which would include a home version of "Donkey Kong," had apparently received the same threatening letter.

Hadl and another MCA attorney explained their boss's position: Sheinberg planned to sue and immediately seek a preliminary in junction that would stop both Nintendo and Coleco from selling any games while the litigation continued. There was only one alter native: Nintendo and Coleco had to settle. It was expected, but chilling nonetheless. Coleco had virtually bet the store on "Donkey Kong." For Nintendo, "Donkey Kong" was the store.

MCA's lawyer waited for a response. Lincoln spoke first. "If you own King Kong and it is infringed by 'Donkey Kong,' then we'll settle," he said. "But I'm not going to buy the goddamn Brooklyn Bridge. First you'll have to prove to me that you own King Kong." There was silence. The MCA team looked at him and Arakawa as if they were Martians, Lincoln recalls—"Like, come on, what are you smoking?"

There was lawyerly huffing and puffing and large bodies fidget ing in uncomfortable chairs until the MCA outside counsel spoke. "Of course we own it," the lawyer said. He was back on the offensive, listing everything that MCA was
going to go after: royalties, inventory, damages. ... He suggested that the Nintendo and Coleco representatives discuss their course of action in privacy. Before the others adjourned to a pri vate conference room, MCA's attorney told Lincoln that the only way to avoid a lawsuit was a settlement. "You don't have a chance in court," he said."

</blockquote>

Coleco urged Nintendo to settle. They thought that if Nintendo would settle, they would be indemnified. Lincoln informed them they were wrong – Atari had been cleared of any liablity for Coleco's Donkey Kong in their contract.

Lincoln had done his homework. He knew that the case for infringment was weak. Donkey Kong was an original idea and Miyamoto would testify to that in court. Furthermore, he know that MCA's claim to King Kong was tenuous at best. He demanded that MCA prove chain of copyright custody, but they refused (Kent 214).

Sid Sheinberg's next move was to sue everyone who had purchased any merchandise license for Donkey Kong and threatened to sue anyone else who worked with Nintendo. Sheinberg was salting the earth, but Nintendo and their partners didn't budge. Sheinberg even threatened his rival Steve Ross at Warner:

<blockquote>

"By then Atari was selling a "Donkey Kong" computer game, and MCA was also pressuring Atari's parent company, Warner Communications. Sheinberg personally threatened Warner CEO Steve Ross. "I told him ... I didn't want to be in the position of suing him," Sheinberg says. Ralston Purina, which had licensed the "Donkey Kong" character for a breakfast cereal, responded to Sheinberg's threat by offering a $5,000 settlement. This incensed Sheinberg. "It's the most stupid
thing I ever heard of," he said. "Throw them out of the building." Thereafter Ralston Purina refused to settle, as did Milton Bradley, which had a "Donkey Kong" board game." (Sheff 119).

</blockquote>

Meanwhile MCA/Universal ordered Tiger Electronics, who had actually licensed King Kong to manufacture a handheld clone of Donkey Kong using King Kong as a character replacing Donkey Kong's barrels with bombs. Nintendo fired back by sueing Tiger and won an injunction. Lincoln and Arakawa flew out to Hollywood to battle Sheinberg:

<blockquote>

On that June day when Arakawa and Lincoln followed Hadl out of the black tower, they walked through the Universal lot, past actors in costumes and palm trees traveling by on a trailer. When they reached a long warehouse-like building, Hadl announced, "The executive dining room," as he grandly opened a side door. Inside was one massive table, that could have seated dozens, set for four. They sat down and waited. Arakawa's fever worsened. Sidney Sheinberg, tall and lanky, wearing large horn-rimmed glasses, arrived and settled into his chair. Arakawa was feeling so ill that he felt he might pass out when, after a round of introductions, an elaborate lunch was served. There was interminable small talk, and by the time Sheinberg announced how pleased he was that Nintendo had agreed to settle the case, Arakawa was ready to keel over.

He looked at Howard Lincoln, who had been charming Sheinberg and Hadl with stories of video games and fishing, and watched the attorney transform. "It's real simple," he said, eyeballing the MCA chief. "We have done a lot of research on this thing, looked at it from top to bottom, and we feel that there is no infringement." Firmly, coldly, he said, "We have no intention of settling." Arakawa had never seen Lincoln this icy, and he was shaken. He had no idea how Sheinberg would react.

His face reddening, Sheinberg pushed back his chair, placed his hands on the edge of the table, and boomed, "What is going on here?" He took a deep breath. "I understood that you were coming down here to talk about a settlement! For Christ's sake, you're wasting my time. What the hell is going on?"

He looked toward Hadl, who went white. Hadl threw a pleading glance at Lincoln, who continued. "It's simple," he said. "I wanted to tell you we aren't going to settle and I wanted to do it by looking you right in the eyes. That, Mr. Sheinberg, is what I'm doing."

Rising from his chair, Sheinberg said, "I've heard enough. You'll hear from our legal department." He glared at Lincoln. "You are making a major mistake," he fumed. "I view litigation as a profit center."

The three men rose, too, and walked behind him to the elevator. Hadl followed Sheinberg in as Arakawa and Lincoln hung back, watching. Before the doors closed, Lincoln called out—"Mr. Sheinberg?" Sheinberg looked at him and grunted. "Have a nice day," Lincoln said. (Sheff 121-122).

</blockquote>

What Lincoln knew, that Sheinberg refused to admit, was that MCA/Universal didn't own the rights to King Kong. In fact, MCA had argued in court in 1972 that King Kong was in the public domain.Nintendo counter sued claiming that Sid Sheinberg was running litigation as a profit center to bully and extort rivals. MCA/Universal would lose their one-hundred-million dollar lawsuit in 1984. Arakawa thanked Howard Lincoln for his successful defense by offering him a job as an executive vice president.

Nintendo won their tiny one million dollar countersuit in 1985. By then it didn't matter. The video game party was over and there was no more money for Sheinberg to squeeze out of the industry.


***********


Level 4
The Family Computer

When Fusajiro Yamauchi founded his playing card company in 1889 he chose the kanji characters nin-ten-do. No one knows what they mean. "They could be understood as 'Leave luck to heaven,' or 'Deep in the mind we have to do whatever we have to do.' The most common reading of it was 'Work hard, but in the end it is in heaven's hands.'" (Sheff 14).

Hard work and luck made Nintendo.

Or maybe "Nintendo" just means "the temple of free hanafuda [cards]" or "the company that is allowed to make (or sell) hanafuda" (Kotaku Sept 10, 2010). Not as romantic.

In 1977, while the Pong market was collapsing in America, Nintendo released it's first home Pong console in Japan where home video gaming was just starting. Nintendo's home pong console was successful, but Hiroshi Yamauchi who seemed like he could sense the coming and goings of the tides, knew consumers would get bored of such simple games. Yamauchi pushed his R&D teams to create something new that would put Nintendo in the lead technologically for at least a year. It had to be a major hit or they were going to go back to selling playing cards.

Masayuki Uemura who had engineered the solar cells used in Nintendo's shooting gallery games was given control of Nintendo's "R&D #2." Yamauchi tasked Uemura's team with creating Nintendo's next home video game product. It had to beat the Atari, Magnavox, Fairchild, and Mattel systems that were shipping from America. It also had to be cheaper: 9800 yen ($75) (Sheff 29).

<blockquote>

"[Uemura] was thrilled to join Nintendo and return to what he had done for fun as a child: make toys. 'There was something different about Nintendo,' Uemura found. 'Here were these very serious men thinking about the content of play. Other companies were importing ideas from America and adapting them to the Japanese market, only making them cheaper and smaller. But Nintendo was interested in original ideas.'" (Sheff 24)

</blockquote>

Uemura's team sqeezed every ounce of value from the components they could find. The central processor of this console would be the same as the one in the Atari 2600, but an independent GPU gave the system superior graphical abilities. It would be a programmable game console that closely matched the arcade graphics experience on a tight budget. The 1970's era CPU gave the system a signature flicker, which looking back, adds to its charm and nostalgia.

Yamauchi poured over every detail of design: the controls, the case, the colors. He insisted on perfection. When the system hit the shelves of Japanese electronics outlets and department stores in 1983, an expensive bug was discovered. His managers advised only repairing units that were returned. Yamauchi disagreed. Every system had to be recalled before consumers lost faith in Nintendo's products. He spent a small fortune recalling and repairing every one of the first 500,000 consoles.

Yamauchi asked his engineers to sneak an expansion port in the system that would allow them to add components later. This was one of his smartest business and design decisions. Neither Yamauchi nor his engineers knew exactly what the port would do in the end, but it was cheap enough to add. Later, the console was fitted with a keyboard and disk drive through this port. When it became Japan's most popular home computer, they would brag: "Yamauchi's Trojan Horse: It slipped into living rooms with nothing but a pair of controllers, innocently toylike, yet it included the capability to do far more than play games... 'In the initial stages of [the system's] development, we foresaw these possibilities,' reads a 1989 corporate report. 'As such, we built a data communications function into the system and provided it with a connection terminal for an adaptor.' Uemura modestly says that the plan worked so well because 'we were lucky.' But GenyoTakeda, a friend of Uemura, says, 'He was so much an amateur that when Yamauchi told him to make this thing, he didn't know that it could not be done." (Sheff 34)

The console's name reveals its intentions: Famicom – Family Computer. The Famicom was released in Japan in 1983 and became an instant smash hit selling seven million consoles in two years. When those keyboards and disk drives started shipping It took on the Japanese computer industry like Commodore took on Atari, IBM, Texas Instruments, Apple and others in America.

In 1986 The Wall Street Journal reported on its success, albeit years after the release: "Youngsters line up at shops to buy its computers. Stock analysts tout its shares. Televesion commentators debate its impct on Japanese society. The fuss is about Nintendo Co and the computer that has become a national obsession, an innocuous-looking game machine called the Family Computer. Twenty years ago Nintendo was a sleepy provincial company with a line of Walt Disney playing cards. These days the toy maker is looking to take on the Goliaths in the market for home computing." (WSJ Jun 22 1986). By 1985 Nintendo owned 90% of the Japanese video game market.

Nintendo had not intended to allow other companies design games for the system, but they were overwhelmed by their own success. In order to keep up with demand for games they had to open the system up to other developers. Nintendo enforced strict rules. First the game had to be perfect – not a single bug. Nintendo had veto power to deny a game a license for any reason. A publisher who tried to get around the restrictions, develop their own compatible system, bipass the BIOS lock-out chip, or even publish on other consoles was threatened with total destruction. In years to come these practices would spawn anti-trust lawsuits in America. According to Tristan Donovan, Nintendo wasn't just keeping bugs out, they were filtering taboo and adult-themed content, in response to the Japanese industry's history of pornographic video games (Donovan 169).

Alfred Milgrom of Beam Software, a Nintendo Licensee said, 'In terms of game testing they revolutionised the concept. They said zero defects – we will not allow you to release a game that has any bugs in it whatsoever. Now zero defects was an unheard of concept in any other software or on any other gaming platform. Nintendo knew if they were going to sell it in the supermarkets and sell it to mums and dads it had to work off the shelf and had to be flawless. They didn’t want returns. We had to change our programming attitude and the way we developed games, which was brilliant. It was really hard work. If you had a bug in your final version you could miss Christmas because it would take a month for them to go through the testing of the title.'" (Donovan 169-171)

Nintendo also had to be the sole manufacturer and Nintendo was going to charge 2000 yen ($15) per cartridge. The minimum order was 10,000 cartridges and the money had to be paid up front (Sheff 60-62). It's often reported that Nintendo's restrictions and fees were meant to keep quality high and avoid the storm of bargain bin third party titles that sank the Atari 2600. While that was the case later on with Nintendo of America, in Japan Yamauchi merely wanted to keep a bigger piece of the pie.

In spite of the restrictions, licensees agreed. They wanted, needed Nintendo's audience. Milgrom said, "Once we were in the family the reality was different... Nintendo’s a big paternalistic company, it’s a lot like a dictatorship. Nintendo say ‘here you are in our family, but you’re going to have to obey the rules of the family’. It’s quite strict and obviously Japanese." In 1984 there were six licensees. In 1985, seventeen. In 1988, fifty. Nintendo made millions just on licenses with little risk to themselves. "Nintendo had turned the Japanese game industry into a client state," Tristan Donovan declares. "Its licensees were willing slaves to Nintendo's will: told how many games they could release, when they could release them, and required to hand over the a cut of the money they made from every game. Yamauchi's insatiable desire for business expansion and Miyamoto's wide-eyed creations had turned Nintendo into Japan's most powerful video game company."

Yamauchi thought it was America's turn to play the Famicom.



***********



Level 5
The Prodigal Son

Imagine a world where Atari sold the most popular, iconic, and beloved video game console of the 1980's, where Atari's fall was halted by an imported system from a little Japanese toy company called Nintendo. The industry never crashed and ended up years ahead of where it is now. Atari was still alive and cool.

Now imagine a world where the Nintendo Entertainment System was killed in it's crib when it's worldwide distributor, Atari, collapsed in 1983, where Sega ruled America and Nintendo was just a quirky Japanese software company.

In 1983 these alternate realities could have come true.

Nintendo's chairman, Hiroshi Yamauchi, contacted his son-in-law, Minoru Arakawa to issue his newest orders. It was time to release the Nintendo's Famicom in America. Atari would distribute and market the system. VP and legal counsel, Howard Lincoln, must contact Ray Kassar at Atari as soon as possible.

Lincoln and Arakawa were going to get their first taste of Warner corporate culture.

<blockquote>

A meeting was set up and Kassar told Arakawa he would send the Warner Communications corporate jet, a Gulf Stream, to col lect him and Howard Lincoln. En route to the airport, Arakawa asked Lincoln if he expected lunch to be served on the plane. Lincoln said there would probably be no food on the short hop between Seattle and Sunnyvale. Arakawa was starved, so the two headed to a restaurant before meeting the jet at a private airport.

The jet, fitted with leather couches and gold-plated ashtrays, was empty except for Arakawa, Lincoln, and the crew. Once it was airborne, the pretty attendant set up dining tables with linen table cloths and asked if the two were ready for lunch. Arakawa threw Lincoln a dirty look when she served pate, fresh poached salmon, and Dom Perignon.

"Just eat the goddamn food," Lincoln muttered.

When the jet landed in San Jose, two chauffeurs escorted the Nintendo executives down a stairway into a waiting limousine. They drove to Atari's headquarters, where they were led to a conference room. The entire upper-management staff was assembled, from Warner's Manny Gerard and Kassar to Atari's Skip Paul and numerous lawyers and vice-presidents familiar from the "Donkey Kong" negotiations. In the middle of the meeting, Steve Ross poked his head in to say hello. He wanted to apologize for the fact that he had to use the company's jet to go back to New York; he had, he said, rented another jet to take Arakawa and Lincoln back to Seattle...

Questions came from Gerard and Kassar, at the far end of the conference table, but also from each of the dozen lawyers and executives. Scribbling notes and fielding most of the questions, Lincoln watched Arakawa. "I can always tell when he understands something or doesn't, when he's pissed off or when he's happy," Lincoln says. "This time Arakawa was just amazed by all those people, all that bureaucracy."

Back at the airport, where they boarded the smaller jet Ross had arranged for them, they were trying to relax and sort out the meeting when the copilot came back to tell them, "Mr. Ross left you some wine." An atten dant served them bottles of a rare Bordeaux. "I don't know how we got home," Lincoln recalls. "We still had a buzz the next day."

</blockquote>

Lincoln and Arakawa had just witnessed the bureaucracy and glottony of Warner and Atari. They were stunned by the waste and inefficiency. Howard Lincoln said, "We got down there and, god, what a cast of thousands: Ray Kassar, Manny Gerard, Steve Ross, Skip Paul. ... And we were just getting hammered with one question after another." (Kent 282) It was a far cry from their lean, mean, and creative company. Atari was an empty suit or a few dozen empty suits.

By 1983 Atari was getting desperate. Management had finally come to the conclusion that they needed something new. They had assigned General Computer Corporation, the same company they had sued and then paid to leave the business, to build the successor to the stilborn 5200. The Atari 7800 Pro system was a next generation system that rivalled the Famicom, but it wasn't finished yet. If Atari had both the Famicom and the 7800 in their pocket they could secure their future by releasing one or both. Perhaps Atari just saw the Famicom as a threat and wanted to purchase it just to twart a potential rival.

At the next meeting Skip Paul and other Atari managers travelled to Kyoto to see the Famicom for themselves. Yamauchi was there too (Sheff 153). He wandered in and out of the meetings. Howard Lincoln told the Atari managers that Mister Yamauchi was a very busy man. It was just an act. They negotiated the deal for days. Yamauchi got everything he wanted, but continued to act distracted. Finally Howard Lincoln told Atari that Mister Yamauchi was growing impatient and that Atari didn't want to see Yamauchi annoyed. The had better sign the deal today or forget it.

"At the eleventh hour, the Atari negotiators retreated to a private office to telephone Ray Kassar in California, who was in touch with Manny Gerard in New York. Yamauchi came back into the room with Arakawa and Lincoln. Lincoln said, 'Mr. Yamauchi, you shouldn't be in here. If the Atari people come back in and you're here, they'll take it as a sign that you are overanxious.'"

The chairman gave Lincoln a look that instantly humbled the cocky attorney. Yamauchi had his own negotiating tactics; he didn't need an arrogant young lawyer from America to tell him what to do. He remained in the room as the Atari team returned. Paul said that the deal was as good as done and asked Lincoln to write up the contracts. They would all meet again in a month at the June Consumer Electronics Show in Chicago to sign the papers. Yamauchi rose and left the meeting. Handshakes and backslapping signaled that the negotiations had been a success." (Sheff 154)

Yamauchi travelled to the Consumer Electronics show in Chicago, in the summer of 1983. Kassar sent a message through his delegation to Yamauchi. He was going to cancel the deal and he was going to sue Nintendo! Why was Kassar so furious? Coleco had demonstrated Donkey Kong on their new home computer system, ADAM, but Atari had the exclusive home computer rights to Donkey Kong. Kassar thought he had been double crossed.

Donkey Kong. Coleco. Again.

"You have to understand that Donkey Kong was the main reason anyone would be interested in working with Nintendo," said Howard Philips. "Mario Bros. and our other games were good B-titles, Super Mario Brothers had not come out yet, and the only game that did better than Donkey Kong was Pac-Man. If Coleco had Donkey Kong, Atari had no reason to work with us." (Kent 285)

Nintendo had not betrayed Atari. Coleco had ported the game without authorization or a license. Coleco stock shot up 20 points the next day. (Sheff 153) Yamauchi was furious, so Lincoln scheduled an emergency meeting with Coleco. It would be another Yamauchi show:

<blockquote>

Present when the meeting began were Minoru and Yoko Arakawa, Ron Judy, Howard Lincoln, and, representing Coleco, Greenberg and several of his colleagues. There was also a translator. Everyone sat around a table. Arakawa whispered to Lincoln, "Don't say anything. Mr. Yamauchi will do this."

Arnold Greenberg, a distinguished-looking man, gray at the temples, ready to celebrate because of the computer Adam's ap parent success, asked where Yamauchi was. Yoko assured him that her father would be there in a moment.
Yamauchi entered the room abruptly and, without addressing anyone, stood at the end of the table. He became, as one of those present put it, "unglued."

He began with a breathy, high-pitched tirade in a Marlon Brando monotone and quickly became loud and abusive. With a piercing cry, he swung his arm in an arc in front of him, shooting his outstretched index finger toward Greenberg.

Yamauchi's diatribe, all in Japanese, completely stunned every one in the room, with the possible exception of the Arakawas. Howard Lincoln says, "It scared the hell out of me."

The Coleco people weren't aware that they had messed up Nintendo's lucrative Atari deal—millions of dollars were in the balance, but they could see that they had somehow incurred Yamauchi's unfathomable wrath. When Greenberg turned to Arakawa for help, he was met with a cold stare. By the time Yamauchi wound down, no one in the room said a word.

The translator finally began to speak. "Mr. Yamauchi is very upset," the man said.

This understatement underscored the fact that the Coleco team could have no recourse but to roll over. The translator continued, calmly reciting the gist of the outburst, but Yamauchi had already won. Greenberg's excuses—he said that Coleco considered the Adam a computer with a video-game machine inside—were feeble. He then tried to turn it on Lincoln, blaming him for "the misunderstanding." This made Lincoln furious; he was about to jump up to respond when he felt Arakawa firmly grasp his forearm, holding him still.

Yamauchi spoke again, never wavering. He made it clear that there was nothing else to be said. No excuses would be listened to. Coleco had to refrain from selling "Donkey Kong" on Adam and announce the mistake, or there would be a lawsuit that would leave nothing of the company. There was no doubt that he meant it.

Greenberg and his colleagues retreated from the suite, shaken. Afterward, at dinner in the hotel's Japanese restaurant, Yamauchi, his tie loosened, turned to Howard Lincoln, who was still in a state of shock, and said, "Sometimes this is the way you have to handle people, Mr. Lincoln. What did you think about that perfor mance?"

(Sheff 154-155)

</blockquote>

Coleco ceased production of Donkey Kong for ADAM immediately, but it was a hollow victory for Yamauchi. In a few weeks Kassar was fired. Atari burned and the Famicom deal went up in the smoke.

Yamauchi found no pleasure in the victory. He was annoyed that once again Nintendo of America had dragged him into an intellectual property battle over Donkey Kong. He blamed his son-in-law. Had NOA been better managed they deal with Atari wouldn't have been poisoned by Coleco's meddling. It was just clumsy.

By 1984 there was no one left in America to help Nintendo sell their Famicom in America. Nintendo was going to have to bring the Famicom to America themselves.

Could the Famicom have saved Atari? Or would Atari have brought Nintendo down with it? Did they even see the potential? The death of the deal turned out to be the best thing for America's video game industry, but it would take three more years to be realized.



***********



Level 6
You can make it anywhere:

All the headlines said, "Video games are dead," and here was this little upstart company that no one had ever heard of called Nintendo that said they were going to bring video games back again. Everybody seemed to think that it was a joke. "oh yeah, they say they can bring video games back again. " -Herb Weisbaum, consumer affairs correspondent, CBS News (Kent 277)

Some of those headlines in 1982-85:

Video Games Go Crunch! (Time)
The Bloodbath (New York Times)
Pac-Man Finally Meets His Match (Time)
City to Atari: ET Trash Go Home (Almogordo Daily News)
The Video-Game Shakeout (Business)
The Worst Is Over Say Battered Video Game Software Suppliers (Consumer Electronics)
Atari Refuses to Let The Video Game Fad Die (Business Week)
The Video Game Business, It's Esay To Lose (Changing Times)
Will Nintendo's new game play? (Home Furnishings Digest)

Then in 1986:

Video games: they're back - and almost as big as ever (LA Times)
Nintendo isn't just Playing Games (Wall Street Journal)
Video games make a Christmas comeback (Fortune)
Atari, Sega, Nintendo plan comeback for video games (Home Furnishings Digest)
Video Games Never Looked so Good (Boy's Life)
New home videogames poised for comeback (Advertising Age)
Nintendo named top toy of 1987 (Playthings)

One company is responsible for the comeback: Nintendo. Anyone with less loyalty and perseverence that Minoru Arakawa would have given up. And he did it with the help of his robot friend.

In 1983 Nintendo of America had no idea how the retail toy market worked in America. They were used to working through distibutors who placed orders for cabinets, paid on delivery, sold or rented to consumers, and assumed all the risk of failure. The margins were narrow. The product life cycle was short. When Arakawa found out how the American toy industry really worked, he was shocked. His whole business philosophy of "Don't give away anything you don't have to" was not going to work here.

Arakawa started small, with the Game & Watch. In Japan Game & Watch handhelds were a huge hit in 1980 selling 40 million in the first three years, but their popularity faded quickly. There wasn't much game to be found in their clamshell cases – they were too simplistic. Still Yamauchi and Arakawa thought they would be good for the American market. American handheld games made by Tiger and Coleco had already experienced a boom and bust, so there wasn't interest by the time Arakawa imported the little devices in 1983. They just didn't sell.

The first business lesson was that toy stores didn't pay their bills until December 10.

<blockquote>

When [Bruce Lowry, of NOA's consumer division] explained the way billing was done in the toy business, the Nintendo executives balked. Lowry said that toy companies expected all invoices to be dated December 10. But Nintendo sold coin-operated video games on net-thirty terms—all bills were due in thirty days. Simple. Lowry explained that in the toy business, orders came in in, say, January or February for a product that was to be shipped in the summer. The toy stores had the winter season to sell it. Then, finally, they began to pay their bills on December 10, once much of the Christmas business was over.

When it finally came time for a major chain to pay its Game & Watch bills to Nintendo—after December 10, 1983—Lincoln received a call from the chain's controller. The gentleman asked for mark-down money, and Lincoln didn't know what he was talking about. "You know, mark-down money," the man said. "We still have a lot of those Game & Watches, you know. We have to mark them down to sell them."

"We sold them to you and sent the invoice," Lincoln said. "We shipped them to you, so you owe us the money. If the product doesn't sell, that's not my fault. You took the risk. You owe us the money."

The man said, "You may have learned a lot of things in law school, but we're in the toy business. If the product doesn't sell, you have to give us mark-down money; you have to reduce the price so that we maintain our margin."

"You gotta be nuts," Lincoln said, but the man explained that the practice was standard. "We're long-term partners," he told the Nintendo manager. "If you don't want to give us mark-down money, fine, but don't have your salesmen call anymore." Nintendo gave the mark-down money.

(Sheff 127-128)

</blockquote>

The practice of offering mark-down money to retailers had been one of the causes of Atari's demise. When retailers shipped games back to Atari or threw them in the bargain bin at a discount, Atari had to cover those losses. Nintendo had always operated under the assumption that the retailers assumed the risk. They tried to avoid the traps that sank Atari, but there was no way around this.

"We spent a great deal of time figuring out what Atari had done wrong." Howard Lincoln said, "Walking through the Atari parking lot, Minoru Arakawa and I were aghast at all the BMWs and Mercedes -- and these 30- year-old guys making gobs of money. We were convinced that we had to be very controlling in the way we handled expansion, compensation, and all those issues. We looked at Atari's distribution practices and its dealings with retailers across the board." (N-Sider 2003)

In America, Nintendo was going to have to assume the risk.

Arakawa read the headlines, he attended CES. He knew that consumers just weren't buying consoles, no matter how much better the graphics and gameplay were than the competition. They wanted computers that could also play games like the ones for Commodore, Coleco, Amiga, Atari, Apple. So Arakawa tried to give them what they wanted by designing a computer/video game hybrid: the Avanced Video System. It had a keyboard, and a light pistol, wireless controls, a disk drive, and looked like a Bang and Olufson stereo.

Television Digest reported before the event:

"Japan's Nintendo is aware that high end home videogame business ois in a state of depression, but feels it can be successful with a sophisticated compononent-type system... The company has already gotten signs of acceptance from some key retailers [and] has eye on sales of up to 500,000 games consoles in 1985... One advanced feature is edit capability on some cartridges, which allows user to modify the game by adding, deleteing or moving some abstacles around to make the game harder or easier to play... [Nintendo] awknowledged the company faces a job getting today's consumers in a mood to make sizable cash outlays for games..." (Television Digest, 1984).

Editable games? 500,000 units sold in a year? Talk about over promising. Arakawa brought the machine to the Winter 1985 CES alone. He looked kind of lost (Kent 287).

<blockquote>

We kind of all looked at it and chuckled as we walked through the show because we all knew that video games were dead. This was the age of the floppy disk, the commodore 64, the Apple Ilc, the IBM PC, and the little one, what did they call it? ... it was PC Junior. Everybody was talking about the Amiga and the Atari ST. That was where everybody thought the business was, really. Nobody thought that Nintendo had much of a chance, and they kind of all laughed at what [Nintendo was] doing.
-Greg Fischbach, founder, Acclaim Entertainment
Kent 285

We didn't even know if we really wanted to get into the home video game business in the United States. We got a mixed reception at the show. The reaction, as I recall, was that anybody who would get into the video game business was nuts. They liked the hardware, though, and the games.
-Howard Lincoln

In January 1985 we introduced the Advance Video System with the music keyboard and keyboard and computer exercise, and it wasn't popular at all. Everybody really thought we were crazy or dumb.
-Minoru Arakawa
Kent 287

</blockquote>

Everyone agreed the games were the best they had seen on a home console. No one agreed to buy it. Disguising the console as a home computer didn't fool anyone – it was a game console. Yamauchi blamed Arakawa for poor salesmanship. Arakawa tried to explain to his father-in-law that the industry in America was uninterested in video game consoles, but Yamauchi wouldn't hear it – he was sitting on 90% market share in Japan. Arakawa was to start again, again.

Arakawa decided to strip down the AVS, get the system true to its core as a gaming console. Kids still wanted to play video games. Games were the sales leader for home computers, not spreadsheets and word processors. Flipping through the computer magazines and newsletters from 1985 one sees articles about and ads for games outnumbering productivity software four-to-one.

"It seemed like all the print media wanted to keep writing about was the death of video games. I mean, they just loved to write that story," Herb Weisbaum said. "'Video game sales are dead, video games are gone, video games are history.' Then I'd go to CES [the Consumer Electronics Show] and see all this stuff, and think, 'Where are these people coming from? It isn't dead.' It was very interesting." (Kent 280)

Nintendo's "Vs." arcade cabinets, which were little more than upright Famicom games, were quite successful in American arcades (Vending Times August 1985). Nintendo just had to convince consumers that they could bring those games home in a little box.

Arakawa redesigned the system to be a pure gaming console, with two controls and a light gun and a robot sidekick, ROB. No keyboard or disk drive. He redubbed the new console the Nintendo Entertainment System, NES for short.

Consumers still needed reassurance that this wasn't going to be another Atari with its copycat, buggy, bargain-bin, even smutty games.

<blockquote>

"The key video game manufacturers always thought the requirement for success was third-party software," said Judy. "Interestingly enough it was the key to their demise. But this type of thinking was true among retailers also. They told us that if we didn't have third-party software our system would never be successful. But I think we're making headway in showing them why we're going in the direction we are. It's taking a lot of effort."

Arakawa said that while there have been between 15 and 20 third-party software vendors in Japan, their offerings have been tightly controlled by Nintendo.

"In the United States," he said, "we have no third-party vendors of software and have not decided yet whether to license any. We don't want to lose control." As a result, there is no possibility that the market will be flooded by software that can be used on Nintendo machines. The widespread disaffection that occurred in video games because of poor performance and poor quality of third-party material will not be allowed to affect Nintendo's business. (HFD Nov 1985)

</blockquote>

Arakawa included a lock-out chip in the NES that prevented third parties from making games without a license. There would be no Custer's Revenge on the NES. All games would get an official "Nintendo Seal of Approval" that reassured coonsumers the game met Nintendo's standards. Nintendo turned their licensing system into a marketting gimmick. Ask the Angry Video Game Nerd how much the "Nintendo Seal of Approval" mattered. Just look at the LJN catalog to see if the seal worked (LJN was Sid Sheinberg's video game company).

At Summer CES Arakawa showed off his NES. Again, retailers weren't interested. Arakawa hired a focus group to test the system on kids. "Arakawa observed sessions as they took place. From behind a one-way mirror, he watched a random sampling of young boys play the NES and heard them say how much they hated it. Typical was the comment ofan eight-year- old who said, 'This is shit!'" (Kent 289). He suggested to his father-in-law that they give up. Yamauchi wouldn't hear it. Nintendo was going to have to sell this thing themselves. The picked New York City for their test market. If you can make it there, you can make it anywhere, they thought.

Arakawa made the cross country trip again. He brought his Nintendo family: Ron Judy, Howard Philips, Bruce Lowry, and thirty other Nintendo employees. They rented their own delivery trucks and went door-to-door to retailers. FAO Swartz, Toy's R' Us, Child's World, Sears, Circuit City, Macy's (Sheff 165). Everyone declined.

"Retailers took a tremendous financial beating because of the way the Atari business had fallen apart. I mean, with the demise of the old 2600 business, you wouldn't even try bringing up the words video game with some of these buyers. It was like they were going to pull you out to the parking lot and shoot you if you said the words video game." -Jim Whims, former vice president, Worlds of Wonder (Kent 280)

"I have to sympathize with the retailers who saw a profitable business disappear right before their eyes" Ron Judy told Home Furnishings Digest. "Video games had become so big that even the top management of large chains became aware of it. I've talked to some of them, and they asked me how a multi-million-dollar-a-year category could suddenly turn into something they couldn't get rid of quickly enough."

"We're years ahead of the competition."
"No."
"We only publish the highest quality games."
"No."
"We'll spend $5 million marketing it."
"No."
"We'll set up and man the displays."
"Video games attract the wrong sort of crowd.""
"Once the kids play, they'll be convinced."
"The only reason I'm sitting in this chair is because the guy before me was fired because of video games."

The sales teams were beaten. They couldn't even get the NES through the doors. Arakawa had a last resort. Give away everything. Assume all the risk. Arakawa offered retailers money back guarantees. Whatever didn't sell, Nintendo would just take back. It was a better deal than they offered for Game & Watch. The retailers accepted it.

Home Furnishings Digest announced: "The fact that Nintendo has demonstrated its willingness to create a market for them, retailers in New York have stepped forward with a substantial investment of their own. Major department stores have allocated windows--and considering the value of floor space--sizable special areas for in-store display and demonstration.
But probably the thing that has sold the product to retailers is the product itself and the value that it represents. The package consists of a base module, two controllers, a light gun, the robot and two software packages. The robot is the clincher. (HFD)



***********



Level 7:
R.O.B.: The Robot

A circle of children in the back of Toy's R Us on Saturday morning. Their parents hands rest on their the kids' shoulders forming another circle. Some teenagers in denim jackets push their way to the front.

"Let me introduce you to R.O.B The world's first video robot. Let me show you R.O.B. in action."

The kids are transfixed. Mom and Dad get nervous. Is this going to be another expensive dead-end toy like that intellivision they bought, but never gets played?

Howard Philips, who was up all night setting up this display. He's been giving this presentation everyday, twenty times a day, for a month. It's only November, so he has at least another month of the R.O.B. show to perform. IS this guy going to start playing a video game with a robot? How is that possible? He continues:

"I get one controller, Rob gets one controller. R.O.B doesn't have fingers like you or I, so we give him this special cartridge which allows him to use his controller. As you can see when he pushes down his red or blue button he operates his controller. When we start playing the video game together, I'll be giving R.O.B. commands on the video game screen."

A college student stops on his way to the Amiga Computer aisle long enough to watch the fragile plastic machine clank and crunch and stack disks like a frail, shaky, arthritic chiaua. The student rolls his eyes at the "robot" and continues on his way. But the kids are enthralled. They aren't paying attention to the words, just the robot. And the parents think it's educational. Their kids will learn how to program a robot!

"With the intoduction of R.O.B and the Nintendo Entertainment System, we have a totally new concept in video games where the game play is no longeron just the video screen. The action is also out in the real world. This adds a whole new physical dimension to the video game, making it much more lively and exciting."

Howard was good at this. He must have sold 10,000 NES's himself with his show. "Howard Phillips turned out to be one of the team's best spokesmen; he had a knack for communicating his own enthusiasm, punctuating his sentences with words like cool and neat. He grabbed kids, old ladies—anyone—and before his victims realized what had hit them, he had them playing." (Sheff 166) He repeated this scene all over New York City for three months. R.O.B. was Arakawa's trojan horse. It got his foot in the door, and the games did the rest.

"When we first got the robot, it did not look like anything that you could associate with the fun and excitement of our arcade games. When you put the batteries in, he made this horrible grinding sound and his arms slowly closed and slowly opened. It was scary," Howard Philips said. "At the same time, he did this really cool thing. He did this technology thing where he would look at the screen. It was new technology; he could somehow read what was going on on the screen. That allowed the consumer retailers to think about it as a new toy." (Kent 288). Howard lincoln adds, "We were selling a robot game, not a video game." (Kent 288)

Meanwhile Nintendo was saturating the market with explosive, mysterious TV ads featuring the little robot blasting through television, surrounded by smoke and beams of strobe lights. "Now you're playing with power!"

"With just one small ad we had a problem with crowd control, people were lined up past the front door and down the street," Bruce Lowry said (HFD). There were even ads in the New Yorker. The team worked around the clock seven days a week setting up displays and selling the NES.

Howard Phillips had a rather unexhilarating experience late one night while setting up a display at a Toys "R" Us in New Jersey. A security guard on the graveyard shift came over and struck up a conversation. When he saw the video-game system, he asked, "Are you from Atari?" Phillips explained that he was from Nintendo with a new and better system. The guard said, "You're working for the Japs? I hope you fall flat on your ass." (Sheff 168-169)

At the end of the christmas season they had sold half of their NES stock 50,000 total. Not a blowout success, but enough to move the operation to other cities. Arakawa hired Worlds of Wonder, the company that had created Teddy Ruxpin and Lazer Tag, to help them market and sell the NES. Jeff Whims recalls telling his employees about the job:

<blockquote>

I will always remember the first sales meeting we had where we introduced the Nintendo a-bit to the sales force. Arakawa came down, and we had the Nintendo people presenting the product, and we said, "This is a product we're going to be supporting on a nationwide basis."

Everyone was sitting in the bar after dinner that night, and these guys who had been Atari's three biggest reps grabbed me and said, "Can we talk to you?" They pulled me aside and said, "We want to let you know that we think you're making an enormous strategic mistake by getting involved in the video game business again." Now these are three Atari reps who made millions of dollars in the video game business already. They said, "Listen. WOW is the hottest company in the world right now. You've got the hottest toy company in the world right now. The video game business is a black smear and it's just gonna drag you down into the abyss."

And I'II always remember that discussion.

The obvious answer was, "Well, listen, I'm glad you feel that way, but I have to tell you, if you want to sell Teddy Ruxpin and you want to sell Laser Tag, you're gonna sell Nintendo as well. And if you feel that strongly about it, then you ought to just resign the line now."

-Jim Whims
(Kent 302-3)

</blockquote>

Tom Zito, founder of Digital Pictures remmembers it being a bigger hit than it actually was: "It's a home run . . . a hit! It's a sell-out. So I'm saying, "Who's gonna be interested in this?" And I said, "Well, I'll bet the toy companies are gonna be very interested in something like this because ... Nintendo is gonna clean your clock next year. I mean, Nintendo is going to launch nationally and they're gonna be represented by Worlds of Wonder."

The Vindicator newspaper colorfully reported: "When last sighted on these shores the video game monster was drowing in its own wretched excesses, seemingly close to extinction. Like lots of other mythical monsters, however, this creature actually floated off to Japan, where it mutated into a new and mightier species. Video games are rising from the ashes." (Vindicator June 20, 1986. "Video games gain in Japan are due for assault on U.S.")

Nintendo kept the supply of systems small and demand stayed high creating an artificial shortage, which spawned it's own publicity. It also prevented mass discounting of unsold systems that helped destroy Atari. (Donovan 168). The Nintendo craze cought on across America.

Within a few months the headlines had changed. Games were back. Nintendo had cleared the path. Sega and Atari followed. The Atari 7800, which Jack Tramiel killed in 1984 finally got a release in 1986, but it was too late. Nintendo was king. Eventually Arakawa would sell 34,000,000 NES's. The NES had a market share of 85%, close to Famicom numbers. Hiroshi Yamauchi must have been relieved that his son-in-law had finally cracked the US market.

Level 8:
Epilogue

Nintendo's reasons for their success as easy to name as the reasons for Atari's demise. They simply did everything opposite from Atari. Nintendo was lean. It fostered creativity and rewarded good design. Nintendo innvated and never gave up on its products. It kept tight control over its partners. They created a family when Atari tore its own apart.

On January 7th 2002 Minoru Arakawa stepped down from Nintendo of America, even before his father-in-law retired. It was so sudden. Yamauchi had been grooming Arakawa to take over Nintendo for the last twenty years to pass the campany in the family, but now he left without fanfare. Rumors circulated. Maybe Arakawa was blamed by Yamauchi for the GameCube running in last place against the Xbox and Playstation in America. Stephen Kent suggests Yamauchi was consolidating power by removing family members from the business as he had done when he took over in 1949 (Japan Times, January 17, 2002). Hank Rogers, a friend of Arakawa and licensee told a BBC documentary: "[Yamauchi] wanted to see Arakawa become more like him, become tougher and take over the company and be Mister Yamauchi, which is basically impossible. I think they had a difference of opinion about which direction the company should go. I don't know the details…" (BBC). Perhaps Yamauchi gave up trying to mold the good natured, loyal, and smiling Arakawa into a model of himself. It's no secret that in the time between 1986 and 2002 the two men fought and Yoko was often stuck in the middle (Business, May 25 1993). Had Yamauchi reached the end of his patience in 2002?

Arakawa gave his own reason: "I think the game business is very difficult business and I worked more than 20 years and I think I'm ready to retire." (BBC) And Arakawa retired in style, to a beach house he built in Hawaii. Yamauchi passed Nintendo outside the family, for the first time in it's 120 year history, to designer Satoro Iwata.

Arakawa invited his father-in-law to Hawaii to visit, but he never went. Arakawa said, "Mr. Yamauchi's life is all business and if it's not business he won't come here… We invited him many times to Hawaii. If it's business he doesn't mind coming here, but if it's not business 'Why should I come?' He will continue to think about Nintendo until he dies." (BBC)

Hiroshi Yamauchi passed away in 2013.



